standard stream &redirection
========================
[An Introduction to Linux I/O Redirection | DigitalOcean](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/an-introduction-to-linux-i-o-redirection)

　　During standard interactions between the user and the terminal, standard input is transmitted through the user’s keyboard. Standard output and standard error are displayed on the user’s terminal as text. Collectively, the three streams are referred to as the standard streams.
1. Standard Input
    The standard input stream typically carries data from a user to a program. Programs that expect standard input usually receive input from a device, such as a keyboard. 

2. Standard Output
Standard output writes the data that is generated by a program. When the standard output stream is not redirected, it will output text to the terminal. 

3. Standard Error
Standard error writes the errors generated by a program that has failed at some point in its execution. Like standard output, the default destination for this stream is the terminal display.
When a program’s standard error stream is piped to a second program, the piped data (consisting of program errors) is simultaneously sent to the terminal as well.


Stream Redirection
---
Linux includes redirection commands for each stream. These commands write standard output to a file. If a non-existent file is targetted (either by a single-bracket or double-bracket command), a new file with that name will be created prior to writing.

Commands with a single bracket overwrite the destination’s existing contents.

### Overwrite
`>` - standard output
`<` - standard input
`2>` - standard error
Commands with a double bracket do not overwrite the destination’s existing contents.

### Append
`>>` - standard output
`<<` - standard input
`2>>` - standard error

e.g.
`cat > file.txt`  will create a file whose content is based on all your input.

### Pipes (`|`)
Pipes are used to redirect a stream from one program to another. When a program’s standard output is sent to another through a pipe, the first program’s data, which is received by the second program, will not be displayed on the terminal. Only the filtered data returned by the second program will be displayed.

### here string/here document
here documents & here strings allow you the ability to generate multi-line data input as one continuous string. 
Here documents are commonly used in shell scripts to *create whole files* or to display long messages. This is helpful when you *wanna pass a string as parameter to commands that only accept file*, such as `cat`, `md5sum` ,etc.

**<<<** denotes a *here string*.
`$ cat <<< 'hi there'`
`hi there`
It passes the word on the right to the standard input of the command on the left.(**cat accepts a file as parameter**)

sometimes here string is better than pipe, cause introducing a pipe means the latter commands run in subshells and some variables might lose when back to parent shell. [link](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/80362/what-does-mean)

**<<** denotes a here document. tutorial: [link](https://bash.cyberciti.biz/guide/Here_documents)
```
$ cat <<EOF
> hi
> there
> EOF
hi
there
```
`EOF` can be any word.

### use redirection to make text file
1. 
```
cat > outfile.txt
>Enter text
>to save press ctrl-d
```

2. 
```
cat > outfile.txt <<EOF
>some text
>to save
>EOF
```

3. 
```
echo "Some text here." > myfile.txt
```
### filter
Filters
Filters are commands that alter piped redirection and output. Note that filter commands are also standard Linux commands that can be used without pipes.
used with `|` operator

`find` - Find returns files with filenames that match the argument passed to find.
`grep` - Grep returns text that matches the string pattern passed to grep.
`tee` - Tee redirects standard input to both standard output and one or more files.
`tr` - tr finds-and-replaces one string with another.
`wc` - wc counts characters, lines, and words.




