1.terminal command
====
shell builtin command
---
### cd 
```
cd / 

cd .. 

cd cd ~ 

cd /dir/dir2 / means from root directory 

cd dir means from current directory 

cd -  used to return to the previous dir 
```

### popd/pushd/dirs
[detials](https://linux.101hacks.com/cd-command/dirs-pushd-popd/)

dirs: Display the directory stack

pushd: Push directory into the stack

popd: Pop directory from the stack and cd to it

use above commands you can save several dirs and go to them in the order of the stacks(first in first out)
### Kill 

`-SIGTERM (-15) `is default 
`signal 9, called SIGKIL` is stronger

1. `kill pid`
2. `kill -9 pid` : force kill

1. `killall prcname `
2. `killall -9 appname`

> to find out the pid of a process:
```
pidof firefox
pgrep firefox
```

### alias
```
alias dtwt='syndaemon -d -i 1.0s'
```
to remove alias:
` unalias foo`

### pwd 
```
Show current path 
```
 
### export

In general, the export command marks an environment variable to be exported with any newly forked child processes and thus it allows a child process to inherit all marked variables. 
detailed instructions [export - LinuxConfig.org](https://linuxconfig.org/learning-linux-commands-export)
> use **export** to set temporary environment variablVe:
`export PATH=$PATH:/home/patrick/clash` or `export PATH=$PATH:$(pwd)`(set env for current dir)
and then you can run executable by command in specified directory.

### source
source is used to read and execute content of a file(usually a set of commands), such as .py or shell script.
source can be replacec by dot : `. script.sh`

### jobs
show all backgroud process with id
> fg %(id) :bring process back to foregroud
> bg

### help

show all shell builtin command
you can show help page for builtin command by(only work for builtin command):
`help cd`

### history

```
history | less : show command histories
and you could use '!id' to run the history command
```

external command
---
*binary located in /bin*

### sudo
sudo only works with executables.

**e.g.**
if you `sudo cd direc`, your computer will look through your PATH, trying to find an executable named "cd". It will not find one. (only the shell built-in command "cd" exists, and that is not an executable file). Hence, you get an error. (On Ubuntu, the error message `sudo: cd: command not found`.)


### more

`more 按页显示文件内容，空格翻页 b回到第一页`


### cat 

```
cat 文件 查看文件内容 

cat > 文件 创建新文件 

cat file1 file2 合并显示文件1, 2

tac 反向显示文件 

cat .bashrc | less : show file content using scroll 
```

### diff
`diff common.txt dev.txt`
output: < means line exists in common.txt but not in dev.txt, > means the other way around.
```
< Werkzeug==0.12.2
< WTForms==2.1
---
> -r common.txt
```
### cp


`cp foo.txt bar.txt` : copy foo.txt to new created bar.txt in the same directory.

 > this will overwrite if there's already a file named bar.txt in current dir
 -b option will make a backup.
 or Using the -i flag the command will prompt to overwrite the file. 

`cp foo.txt dir` : copy file to directory named dir in current folder.

`cp foo bar.txt baz.txt dir`: copy multiple file to a dir

To copy a directory pass the -R flag. This will recursively copy a folder and create a copy.
`cp -R directory/ foo`

目标文件存在时，会询问是否覆盖 `cp -i` 

一个目录及其档案复制到另一个目录下 `cp -a `

How to preserve file attributes: 
pass the `--preserve` option along with the attributes to be preserved. 

### touch

`touch filename` used to create empty file
`touch -a filename` use to update access time without changing the file

### rm

```
rm -i 代替 rm ，删除前确认 

rm -r删除目录及其下面的所有档案 

rm -v：显示指令的详细执行过程 

rm -d 只删除空目录 ，代替 rmdir 不能删除非空目录 
```

### tree 

 
```
show all directories and file in tree pattern 
```
 

### mkdir 

```

递归创建多个目录 

mkdir -p test2/test22 
```
 



###  ls 


`ls -a `

`ls -l `show files and detailed info(with -h can show you human readable info, size will be mb, kb)
 > `ll`: show files and detailed info including hidden files 
    [detailed tutorial](https://www.garron.me/en/go2linux/ls-file-permissions.html)

    #drwxr-xr-x  2 patrick patrick     4096 Mar 26 12:54 bin
     -rw-r--r--  1 patrick patrick       99 Nov 15 17:12 bluetooth.txt

The permissions info is represented by first ten characters, first character identifies the type, d means directory and - means file the next nine characters represent permissions for each set.
1. first three for user who owns the file
2. middle three for group
3. last three for others

e.g. `rwx` means having all read write execute permissions, `r-x` means no write permissions.
     `2` means number of dir or links
     `patrick` and `patrick` mean user and group
     `4096` means size by bits

`ls -R ` recursively, show all dir and files inside it.

计算当前目录下的文件数和目录数 
`ls -l * |grep "^-"|wc -l` 文件个数 
`ls -l * |grep "^d"|wc -l` 目录个数 

`ls -l` for mtime, `ls -lu` for atime, `ls -lc` for ctime
1. mtime, or modification time, is when the file was last modified. 
2. ctime, or change time, is when the file’s property changes. 
3. atime, or access time, is updated when the file’s contents are read by an application or a command
> *Atime can be updated alone, Ctime will update atime, Mtime will update both atime and ctime.*


### lsblk 
列出系统上的所有磁盘列表, 就是列出所有储存设备

output:

1. RM:是否为可卸载设备 (removable device),如光盘、USB 磁盘等等
2. SIZE:当然就是容量啰!
3. RO:是否为只读设备的意思
4. TYPE:是磁盘 (disk)、分区 (partition) 还是只读存储器 (rom) 等输出
5. MOUTPOINT:就是前一章谈到的挂载点!

###  ps 

> **all process can be found in /proc directory**

detailed tutorial: [ps - Linux manual page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/ps.1.html)

* `ps` :without parameter will only show process executed by root
* `ps –A/e `:all process including those started by bootloader(systemd)
* `ps -A | grep <processname> `
* `ps -eu` show fields like %CPU   %MEM    VSZ    RSS
* `ps l` show basic info like s、pid、ppid、time 和 ucmd 等字段信息。

> Usually when we use the command ps we add parameters like -a, -x and -u.
While -a lists processes started by all users, -x also lists processes started at boot like daemons, the parameter -u will add columns with additional information on each process:
* `ps aux` equals to `ps -eu`

* `ps -o tid,sid,pid...(list of fields)` customize output fields

	- *sid*(session),*tid*(terminal),*pid*(process)
	- *ppid*(parent),*tpgid*(Linux 上的所有守护进程的 tpgid 值都是 - 1)
	- *cmd*(location of cmd), *ucmd*(short one),*nice/ni*(priority, [-20,19], large means low priority)
	-  *s*(state)
	
| field | explanation                                                    |
| ----- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| vsz   | virtual memory size KB vsz值并不反映真正物理内存大小                        |
| rss   | resident set size 表示进程真正占用了的物理内存大小，单位 KB                       |
| pmem  | 占用的物理内存大小 (rss) 占本机总物理内存大小百分比                                  |
| PRI   | priority of the process.  Higher number means lower priority.  |
| nlwp  | 表示当前process线程组中的线程个数，单线程进程此值均为 1                               |


* `ps k/--sort [+/-]field` sort the output by specified field, + ascending, - descending

* filter:
	* `ps p 2,3,6` select ones whose pid equals to 2,3,6
	* `ps -s <sid>` 
	* `ps U <uid or user>`
	* `ps -t <tty1>`  , (`ps T` to show current terminal)
 
### file
show the type of a file or directory, including binary, ASCII text, directory and data.

### whereis/which/whatis

The whereis command lets users locate binary, source, and manual page files for a command. 
`whereis ls`
also, whereis can help you to know whether a command is shell builtin.(if whereis can't locate the path, it is a builtin)

`which` searches your user-specific PATH (which may include some of the locations whereis searches, and may not include others - it might also include some places that whereis doesn't search if you'd added to your PATH)

`whatis` display one-line manual page descriptions

### type

The type command is used to find out if command is builtin or external binary file. It also indicate how it would be interpreted if used as a command name.

`type -t command`
outputs will be:
> alias (command is shell alias)
> keyword (command is shell reserved word)
> function (command is shell function)
> builtin (command is shell builtin)
> file (command is disk file)

`type -a command`
The -a option can be used to find out if given command is disk file, alias, keyword or function. It will display all of the places that contains an executable available including aliases, builtins, and functions.

`type -a pwd`
Sample Outputs:
```
pwd is a shell builtin
pwd is /bin/pwd
```



### chmod/chown/chgrp

```
chmod [ugao] [+-=] [rwx] [file or dir]
    1. u:user g:group a:all o:other, if none of these are used, the 'a' is default.
    2. +:add permissions -:remove them =:set a permission and remove others
    3. read write execute 

e.g. chmod u=rw, og+r, new_file.txt
     chmod -R u+x directory  -R means changing permissions recersively for a dirctory.
     
the other way is to use number to change permissions
各权限的分数对照表如下:
> r:4 > w:2 > x:1

e.g.### 
[-rwxrwx] 分数则是:
> owner = rwx = 4+2+1 = 7 
> group = ### rwx = 4+2+1 = 7 
> others=  = 0+0+0 = 0
所以等一下我们设置权限的变更时,该文件的权限数字就是770啦!
```
chgrp :改变文件所属群组
chown :改变文件拥有者


### curl

```
to retrieve content with url 
with -o option download content to filr curl url -o filename
```

### df

```
df -h show disk space condition
df -Th: to see filesystem of  and the type of them
```

### du
`du -h` show the size of current directory with readable result.
`du -a -h` show all files along with their size in current directory.


### dd
dd 可备份完整的 partition 或 disk ,因为 dd 可读取磁盘的 sector 表面数据


### ln
create hard link or symbolic link
hardlink: `ln text.txt test.txt`
symboliclink: `ln -s text.txt test.txt`


### find

`find . -name <filename>` :this will show all file and directories named <filename> in current directory(.), if path is ignored, current dir is default.
`find . -iname <name>` : means case insensitive
`find . type f -name <name>`: means only show content whose type is file
`find . -name '*abcd*'`: wild card

#### option about time
`find path -mtime +7` means file that hasn't been modifed in last 7 days.
1. +4代表大于等于5天前的文件名
2. -4代表小于等于4天内的文件文件名
3. 4则是代表4-5那一天的文件文件名

#### option about user
1. `-uid n` :n 为数字,这个数字是使用者的帐号 ID,亦即 UID ,这个 UID 是记录在/etc/passwd 里面与帐号名称对应的数字。
2. `-gid n `:n 为数字,这个数字是群组名称的 ID,亦即 GID,这个 GID 记录在/etc/group
3. `-user name` :name 为使用者帐号名称
4. `-group name`:name 为群组名称喔
5. `-nouser`:寻找文件的拥有者不存在 /etc/passwd 的人!
6. `-nogroup`:寻找文件的拥有群组不存在于 /etc/group 的文件!

#### option about file
`-name filename`:搜寻文件名称为 filename 的文件;
`-size [+-]SIZE`:搜寻比 SIZE 还要大(+)或小(-)的文件。这个 SIZE 的规格有:
> c: 代表 Byte, k: 代表 1024Bytes。所以,要找比 50KB还要大的文件,就是“ -size +50k ”
`-type TYPE`:搜寻文件的类型为 TYPE 的,类型主要有:一般正规文件 (f), 设备文件 (b, c), 目录 (d), 链接文件 (l), socket (s), 及 FIFO (p) 等属性。
`-perm mode` :搜寻文件权限“刚好等于” mode 的文件,这个 mode 为类似 chmod的属性值,举例来说, -rwsr-xr-x 的属性为 4755 !
`-perm -mode` :搜寻文件权限“必须要全部囊括 mode 的权限”的文件,举例来说,我们要搜寻 -rwxr--r-- ,亦即 0744 的文件,使用 -perm -0744,
当一个文件的权限为 -rwsr-xr-x ,亦即 4755 时,也会被列出来, 因为 -rwsr-xr-x 的属性已经囊括了 -rwxr--r-- 的属性了。
`-perm /mode` :搜寻文件权限“包含任一 mode 的权限”的文件,举例来说,我们搜寻 -rwxr-xr-x ,亦即 -perm /755 时,但一个文件属性-rw------- 也会被列出来,因为他有 -rw.... 的属性存在!


find files by name, this command will find files in database in /var/lib/mlocate/, instead of scaning the disk, so it is faster than `find` command, but the database needs to be updated by hand.(auto per day)

update database: `sudo updatedb`

### grep

```
grep 'import' new.py :Search any line that contains the word in filename (with -i option search case-insensitive)
grep -r 'import' <path>: serch all files in current dir for word 'import'(with path option search for given dir)
grep -c 'nixcraft' frontpage.md : Search and display the total number of times that the string ‘nixcraft’ appears in a file named frontpage.md
grep -w "boo" file :with -w option search exact word 'boo' only, will not match 'boo1', '2boo' ...

with -n option show the line number of the result
Use the -l option to list file name whose contents mention main:  grep -l 'main' *.c

```

### awk
main use: Splits each input line into fields(*delimited by whitespace character by default* ) and display them respectively.

1. `$ awk '{print}' employee.txt` work like **cat**
2. `$ awk '/manager/ {print}' employee.txt ` work like **grep 'word' file.txt**, display line that contains given word.
3. `$ awk '{print $1,$4}' employee.txt ` print first 1st and 4th field if possible, **$0** means all fileds.
4. `$ awk '{print NR,$0}' employee.txt ` print lines with line number
5. `$ awk 'NR==3, NR==6 {print NR,$0}' employee.txt ` print Lines From 3 to 6


### less

```
like cate, less could also show content of a file: less new.py
```

### man

```
man to show instructions of a command: man ps
```

### top


The top command shows you a real-time display of the data relating to your Linux machine. 

1. The first line shows you the time and how long your computer has been running for, how many users are logged into it, and what the load average has been.

2. The second line shows the number of tasks and their states: running, stopped, sleeping and zombie.

3. The third line shows CPU information. Here’s what the fields mean:

- us: value is the CPU time the CPU spends executing processes for users, in “user space”
- sy: value is the CPU time spent on running system “kernel space” processes
- ni: value is the CPU time spent on executing processes with a manually set nice value
- id: is the amount of CPU idle time
- wa: value is the time the CPU spends waiting for I/O to complete
- hi: The CPU time spent servicing hardware interrupts
- si: The CPU time spent servicing software interrupts
- st: The CPU time lost due to running virtual machines (“steal time”)

4. The fourth line shows the total amount of physical memory, and how much is free, used and buffered or cached.

5. The fifth line shows the total amount of swap memory, and how much is free, used and available  (taking into account memory that is expected to be recoverable from caches).

> pressed the E/e key to change the display into more humanly digestible figures instead of long integers representing bytes.


### w/who

w is a command-line utility that displays information about currently logged in users and what each user is doing. It also gives information about how long the system has been running, the current time, and the system load average.
detailed info about output explanation and avaiable options: [link](https://linuxize.com/post/w-command-in-linux/)

### su

switch to root usr. use `exit` to exit root user.

### systemctl

#### manage daemon 

* `systemctl [command] [unit]`
	command 有:

| command   | explanation                      |
| --------- | -------------------------------- |
| start     |                                  |
| stop      |                                  |
| restart   |                                  |
| reload    | reload the config                |
| enable    | run on boot                      |
| disable   |                                  |
| status    |                                  |
| is-active |                                  |

不应该使用 kill 的方式来关掉一个正常的服务否则 systemctl 会无法继续监控该服务, use stop command instead.

#### list all service(.service, .target)
* `systemctl list-unit-files | grep enabled` :will list all enabled service that will run on boot.
	* `systemctl | grep running`

* `systemctl [command] [--type=TYPE] [--all]`
	command:
	1. `list-units`:依据 unit 列出目前有启动的 unit。
	2. `list-unit-files` :依据 /usr/lib/systemd/system/ 内的文件,将所有文件列表说明。
	4. 若加上 `--all` 会列出没启动的。
    3. --type, 主要有 service, socket, target 等

#### target unit
 multi-user.target: 纯文本模式
 graphical.target: 图形界面

* `systemctl get-default` : to check the default mode, text-mode or graphical
* `systemctl set-default multi-user.target` : set text-mode as default
* `systemctl isolate multi-user.target` : quit graphical interface and into text-mode(sigh out)
* `systemctl isolate graphical.target` : re-enter graph
	* 在 target 项目则请使用 isolate (隔离不同的操作模式) 

* `systemctl poweroff/reboot/suspend/hibernate/rescue/emergency` 
	* above cmd could be alternates to `isolate shutdown.target|rescue.target ...` 

#### daemon tree
* `systemctl list-dependencies [unit] [--reverse]`
	* reverse这个选项,代表“谁还会用到我的服务”的意思
	* without [unit] option means default.target(e.g. graphical.target)

e.g.
```
[root@study ~]# systemctl list-dependencies --reverse
default.target
└─graphical.target
```


### wget

wget is a free utility for non-interactive download of files from the web. It supports HTTP, HTTPS, and FTP protocols, aser well as retrieval through HTTP proxies.
```
'wget http://website.com/files/file.zip' : download the file from web
'wget www.pincong.rocks' :download html into index.html file
'wget url -O <filename> : download the file and change its name
'wget -o download.log url' : log output to a file
'wget -r url' : download a html page and all its links' htmls. (use -l option to specify the recursion level)

```




### netstat

[detailed tutorial](https://www.howtogeek.com/513003/how-to-use-netstat-on-linux/)

> socket
Sockets have two main states: They are either connected and facilitating an ongoing network communication, or they are waiting for an incoming connection to connect to them. 
The listening socket is called the server, and the socket that requests a connection with the listening socket is called a client.These names have nothing to do with hardware or computer roles. They simply define the role of each socket at each end of the connection.

The `netstat` command lets you discover which sockets are connected and which sockets are listening. Meaning, it tells you which ports are in use and which processes are using them. It can show you routing tables and statistics about your network interfaces and multicast connections.

1. `netstat -a` The -a (all) option makes netstat show all the connected and waiting sockets. 
**output**:

    Active Internet connections (servers and established)
    |Proto |Recv-Q |Send-Q |Local Address     |Foreign Address     |State |
    |tcp   |    0      0     localhost:domain      0.0.0.0:*        LISTEN 
    |tcp   |    0      0     0.0.0.0:ssh           0.0.0.0:*        LISTEN 
    |tcp   |    0      0     localhost:ipp         0.0.0.0:*        LISTEN 
    |tcp   |    0      0     localhost:smtp        0.0.0.0:*        LISTEN 
    |tcp6  |    0      0     [::]:ssh              [::]:*           LISTEN 
    |tcp6  |    0      0     ip6-localhost:ipp     [::]:*           LISTEN 

 
    Active UNIX domain sockets (servers and established)
    Proto RefCnt Flags   Type     State       I-Node  Path
    unix  24     [ ]     DGRAM                12831   /run/systemd/journal/dev-log
    unix  2      [ ACC ] STREAM    LISTENING  24747   @/tmp/dbus-zH6clYmvw8
    unix  2      [ ]     DGRAM                26372   /run/user/1000/systemd/notify
    unix  2      [ ]     DGRAM                23382   /run/user/121/systemd/notify
    unix  2      [ ACC ] SEQPACKET LISTENING  12839   /run/udev/control

The “Active Internet” section lists the connected external connections and local sockets listening for remote connection requests. That is, it lists the network connections that are (or will be) established to external devices.

The “Active Internet” columns are:
**Proto**: The protocol used by this socket (for example, TCP or UDP).
**Recv-Q**: The receive queue. These are incoming bytes that have been received and are buffered, waiting for the **local process** that is using this connection to read and consume them.
**Send-Q**: The send queue. This shows the bytes that are ready to be sent from the send queue.
**Local address**: The address details of the local end of the connection. The default is for netstat to show the **local hostname** for the address, and the name of the service for the port.
**Foreign address**: The address and port number of the remote end of the connection.
**State**: The state of the local socket. For UDP sockets, this is usually blank.(check out tcp notes in onenote)


The “UNIX domain” section lists the connected and listening internal connections. In other words, it lists the connections that have been established within your computer between different applications, processes, and elements of the operating system.

2. `netstat -au | less` -u option means show only udp, you can also use -t option to show tcp
3. `netstat -s` -s shows Network Statistics , use -t or other option to show result by Protocol
4. `netstat -p` -p shows process id with socket.
5. `netstat -tulpn` find out which process is listing upon a port


### ifconfig

command that allows for diagnosing and configuring network interfaces.
[detailed explanation](https://goinbigdata.com/demystifying-ifconfig-and-network-interfaces-in-linux/)
> `tcpdump -D` can also show list of available interfaces

### test

test is used as part of the conditional execution of shell commands.
test exits with the status code determined by EXPRESSION. 
To see the exit status,type `echo $?`, A value of 0 means the expression evaluated as true, and a value of 1 means the expression evaluated as false.

two form:
1. test EXPRESSION
2. [ EXPRESSION ]

`test 100 -lt 99 && echo "Yes." || echo "No."`
or `[ 100 -lt 99 ] && echo "Yes." || echo "No."`

```
patrick@surface:$ [ 100 -eq 22 ]
patrick@surface:$ echo $?
1
```
[detailed usage](https://www.computerhope.com/unix/test.htm)


### printf


printf 由 POSIX 标准所定义，因此使用 printf 的脚本比使用 echo 移植性好。

printf 使用引用文本或空格分隔的参数，外面可以在 printf 中使用格式化字符串，还可以制定字符串的宽度、左右对齐方式等。
> 默认 printf 不会像 echo 自动添加换行符，我们可以手动添加 \n。

e.g.
```
printf "%-10s %-8s %-4s\n" 姓名 性别 体重kg  
printf "%-10s %-8s %-4.2f\n" 郭靖 男 66.1234 
printf "%-10s %-8s %-4.2f\n" 杨过 男 48.6543 
printf "%-10s %-8s %-4.2f\n" 郭芙 女 47.9876 
```

output:
```
姓名     性别   体重kg
郭靖     男      66.12
杨过     男      48.65
郭芙     女      47.99
```

[detailed tutorial](https://www.computerhope.com/unix/uprintf.htm)

### uname
`uanme` to check out the kernel and system information