2.other commands
========================

suspend or hibernate pc
---
> sudo systemctl suspend
> sudo systemctl hibernate

check all available commands in bash
---
> ls /bin/

internal command or external command
---
`whereis <cmd>` , if the corresponding path is shown for a specified command, this command is a external command, or otherwise.

> 通俗地说，“内部命令”就是内置在 shell 中的命令；而“外部命令”则对应了某个具体的【可执行文件】。当你在 shell 中执行“外部命令”，shell 会启动对应的可执行文件，从而创建出一个“子进程”；而如果是“内部命令”，就【不】产生子进程。


unzip .zip file
---
`gunzip <filename>`


open file in default app
---
`xdg-open file`

show all symbolic link in current directory
---
To only process the current directory:
`find . -maxdepth 1 -type l -ls`

environment var 
---
[link](note://environment_variables)

* env

allow you to run another program in a another environment without influencing the current one.
run without parameter, will print all environment variables.

* `printenv`
* `printenv HOME`
* `printenv LANG PWD`: print env variables

* set

set  **shell** variables
use without option, `set `show a list of env, shell and variables without parameter
> to create shell variables: `var='sgjgdks'`

* unset

delete shell and env variables

* export

In general, the export command marks an environment variable to be exported with any newly forked child processes and thus it allows a child process to inherit all marked variables. 
detailed instructions [export - LinuxConfig.org](https://linuxconfig.org/learning-linux-commands-export)

use **export** to set temporary environment variable:
`export MYVAR=10`
`export PATH=$PATH:/home/patrick/clash` or `export PATH=$PATH:$(pwd)`(set env for current dir)
and then you can run executable by command in specified directory.

__Persistent Environment Variables__
```
To make Environment variables persistent you need to define those variables in the bash configuration files. In most Linux distributions when you start a new session, environment variables are read from the following files:

1. /etc/environment - Use this file to set up system-wide environment variables. Variables in this file are set in the following format:
FOO=bar
VAR_TEST="Test Var"

2. /etc/profile - Variables set in this file are loaded whenever a bash login shell is entered. When declaring environment variables in this file you need to use the export command:
export JAVA_HOME="/path/to/java/home"
export PATH=$PATH:$JAVA_HOME/bin

3. Per-user shell specific configuration files. For example, if you are using Bash, you can declare the variables in the ~/.bashrc:
export PATH="$HOME/bin:$PATH"

To load the new environment variables into the current shell session use the source command:
source ~/.bashrc
```

show free memory
---
`free -m/h/g`

show trusted keys
---
`apt-key`



network interface
---

1. `ifconfig` allows for diagnosing and configuring network interfaces.
[detailed explanation](https://goinbigdata.com/demystifying-ifconfig-and-network-interfaces-in-linux/)
2. `tcpdump -D` can also show list of available interfaces

A new naming scheme(`wlp2s0`) has been introduced, to solve problems that arose from the old (`eth0`, `wlan0`) naming standards.
Basically, the first two letter describe the type of interface. `wl` for wlan, `en` for ethernet. The following code is often a description of the physical placement of the device in your computer - `p2` is likely PCI bus 2, and `s0` is likely slot 0.

