3.operator
========================

&& and ||
---

1. The right side of **&&** will only be evaluated if the exit status of the left side is zero (i.e. true). (which means success)
 > ◇进程退出码

    任何一个进程退出的时候，都对应某个【整数类型】的“退出码”。
    按照 POSIX 系统（UNIX ＆ Linux）的传统惯例——
    当“退出码”为【零】，表示“成功 or 正常状态”；
    当“退出码”【非零】，表示“失败 or 异常状态”。
2. **||** evaluate the right side only if the left side exit status is non-zero (i.e. false).

```
$ false && echo howdy!****

$ true && echo howdy!
howdy!

mkdir python-virtual-environments && cd python-virtual-environments

statement && statement1 || statement2: statements succeed then stmt1 or execute stmt2
```

&
---
make command run in backgroud
```
apt install <application> &
```

;
--
**;** is just a command separator. Thus command2 will be executed whatever command1 returned.
```
command1; command2
```

!
---
The NOT Operator **!** is much like an ‘except‘ statement. 
```
rm -r !(*.html) :delete all files except for html type
```

|
---
This PIPE operator is very useful where the output of first command acts as an input to the second command.
> Pipes
    Pipes are used to redirect a stream from one program to another. When a program’s standard output is sent to another through a pipe, the first program’s data, which is received by the second program, will not be displayed on the terminal. Only the filtered data returned by the second program will be displayed.
```
find . *python* | less
```
{}
---
Command Combination Operator {}

()
---
to indicate the command precedence

\
---
to concatenate several lines into one command, used to handle long commands

/
---
root directory

.
---
current directory ,  and **..** means parent directory

~
---
home directory

$
---
used to show variable with echo command
`echo $PATH`
to create shell variable and assign value to it:
`variable='this is string'`
show string from specified position:
`echo ${string:1}` `echo ${string:1:3} (start from 1st character and up to next show three characters totally)`


https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/218270/which-are-bash-shell-special-parameters

- **$()** similar to (``), used to invoke a subshell and it output is then placed in the original position.
`echo $(date)` (the output of `date` command is the current date)
    + subshell： https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/442692/is-a-subshell
- **$?** is used to find the return value of the last executed command
- **$$**($$) Expands to the process ID of the shell. In a () subshell, it expands to the process ID of the invoking shell, not the subshell.
    - `echo $(echo $$)` will show invoking shell PID
- **$!** Expands to the process ID of the job most recently placed into the background
- **$0** Expands to the name of the shell or shell script
- **$_** Gives the last argument to the previous command. At the shell startup, it gives the absolute filename of the shell script being executed.

wild card
---
**?** stand for one character, __*__ stand for any sequence of characters, [235] means at least match one of these number