
## System managment
### systemctl

**manage daemon** :  

* `systemctl [command] [unit]`
	command 有:

| command   | explanation                      |
| --------- | -------------------------------- |
| start     |                                  |
| stop      |                                  |
| restart   |                                  |
| reload    | reload the config                |
| enable    | run on boot                      |
| disable   |                                  |
| status    |                                  |
| is-active |                                  |

不应该使用 kill 的方式来关掉一个正常的服务否则 systemctl 会无法继续监控该服务, use stop command instead.

**list all service(.service, .target)**:  
* `systemctl list-unit-files | grep enabled` :will list all enabled service that will run on boot.
	* `systemctl | grep running`

* `systemctl [command] [--type=TYPE] [--all]`
	command:
	1. `list-units`:依据 unit 列出目前有启动的 unit。
	2. `list-unit-files` :依据 /usr/lib/systemd/system/ 内的文件,将所有文件列表说明。
	4. 若加上 `--all` 会列出没启动的。
    3. --type, 主要有 service, socket, target 等

**target unit**:  
 multi-user.target: 纯文本模式
 graphical.target: 图形界面

* `systemctl get-default` : to check the default mode, text-mode or graphical
* `systemctl set-default multi-user.target` : set text-mode as default
* `systemctl isolate multi-user.target` : quit graphical interface and into text-mode(sigh out)
* `systemctl isolate graphical.target` : re-enter graph
	* 在 target 项目则请使用 isolate (隔离不同的操作模式) 

* `systemctl poweroff/reboot/suspend/hibernate/rescue/emergency` 
	* above cmd could be alternates to `isolate shutdown.target|rescue.target ...` 

**daemon tree**:  
* `systemctl list-dependencies [unit] [--reverse]`
	* reverse这个选项,代表“谁还会用到我的服务”的意思
	* without [unit] option means default.target(e.g. graphical.target)

e.g.
```
[root@study ~]# systemctl list-dependencies --reverse
default.target
└─graphical.target
```


## System Performance, Monitoring
### top
The top command shows you a real-time display of the data relating to your Linux machine. 

1. The first line shows you the time and how long your computer has been running for, how many users are logged into it, and what the load average has been.

2. The second line shows the number of tasks and their states: running, stopped, sleeping and zombie.

3. The third line shows CPU information. Here’s what the fields mean:

- us: value is the CPU time the CPU spends executing processes for users, in “user space”
- sy: value is the CPU time spent on running system “kernel space” processes
- ni: value is the CPU time spent on executing processes with a manually set nice value
- id: is the amount of CPU idle time
- wa: value is the time the CPU spends waiting for I/O to complete
- hi: The CPU time spent servicing hardware interrupts
- si: The CPU time spent servicing software interrupts
- st: The CPU time lost due to running virtual machines (“steal time”)

4. The fourth line shows the total amount of physical memory, and how much is free, used and buffered or cached.

5. The fifth line shows the total amount of swap memory, and how much is free, used and available  (taking into account memory that is expected to be recoverable from caches).

6. the task area
`PID` This is the process ID, a unique positive integer that identifies a process.  
`USER` This is the “effective” username (which maps to a user ID) of the user who started the process. Linux assigns a real user ID and an effective user ID to processes; the latter allows a process to act on behalf of another user. (For example, a non-root user can elevate to root in order to install a package.)  
`PR` and `NI` The “NI” field shows the “nice” value of a process. The “PR” field shows the scheduling priority of the process from the perspective of the kernel. The nice value affects the priority of a process.  
`VIRT`, `RES`, `SHR` and %`MEM` These three fields are related with to memory consumption of the processes. “VIRT” is the total amount of memory consumed by a process. This includes the program’s code, the data stored by the process in memory, as well as any regions of memory that have been swapped to the disk. “RES” is the memory consumed by the process in RAM, and “%MEM” expresses this value as a percentage of the total RAM available. Finally, “SHR” is the amount of memory shared with other processes.  
`TIME+` This is the total CPU time used by the process since it started, precise to the hundredths of a second.

6. command
 * pressed the `E/e` key to change the display into more humanly digestible figures instead of long integers representing bytes.
* you want to kill a process, simply press `k` when top is running
* Sorting the process list
    * `‘M’` to sort by memory usage
    * `‘P’` to sort by CPU usage
    * `‘N’` to sort by process ID
    * `‘T’` to sort by the running time
    * `F` to sort bt other field.
    * you can switch to ascending order by pressing `‘R’`.
* Press `‘c’`  to show the full path to the program

6. Saving your settings
If you’ve made any changes to top’s output, you can save them for later use by pressing `‘W’`. top writes its configuration to the .toprc file in your home directory.

## Network Management
### Firewalld

https://wangchujiang.com/linux-command/c/firewall-cmd.html  
If you’ve got a web server like nginx running on your machine, you can confirm that the firewall is working by browsing to your server’s web from your phone. If the site is unreachable, then firewalld is doing its job.  
By default, firewalld will be active and will reject all incoming traffic with a couple of exceptions like SSH,  you’ll want to open the HTTP(80) and HTTPS(443) ports respectively.

**状态选项**
```
firewall-cmd --state                # 显示firewalld的状态；
--reload                       # 不中断服务的重新加载；
--complete-reload              # 中断所有连接的重新加载；
--runtime-to-permanent         # 将当前防火墙的规则永久保存；
--check-config                 # 检查配置正确性；
```

**端口管理**
```
# 打开443/TCP端口
firewall-cmd --add-port=443/tcp

# 永久打开3690/TCP端口
firewall-cmd --permanent --add-port=3690/tcp

# 永久打开端口好像需要reload一下，临时打开好像不用，如果用了reload临时打开的端口就失效了
# 其它服务也可能是这样的，这个没有测试
firewall-cmd --reload

# 查看开放的端口
firewall-cmd --list-ports               

# 查看防火墙，添加的端口也可以看到
firewall-cmd --list-all
```

**控制端口 / 服务**  
可以通过两种方式控制端口的开放，一种是指定端口号另一种是指定服务名。虽然开放 http 服务就是开放了 80 端口，但是还是不能通过端口号来关闭，也就是说通过指定服务名开放的就要通过指定服务名关闭；通过指定端口号开放的就要通过指定端口号关闭。
```
firewall-cmd --add-service=mysql        # 开放mysql端口
firewall-cmd --remove-service=http      # 阻止http端口
firewall-cmd --list-services            # 查看开放的服务
firewall-cmd --add-port=3306/tcp        # 开放通过tcp访问3306
firewall-cmd --remove-port=80tcp        # 阻止通过tcp访问3306
firewall-cmd --add-port=233/udp         # 开放通过udp访问233
```

**日志管理**
```
firewall-cmd --get-log-denied         # 获取日志记录设置
firewall-cmd --set-log-denied=<value> # 设置拒绝记录日志， 'all','unicast','broadcast','multicast','off'

dmesg | grep -i REJECT    # view denied packets
```

### netstat

[detailed tutorial](https://www.howtogeek.com/513003/how-to-use-netstat-on-linux/)

> socket
Sockets have two main states: They are either connected and facilitating an ongoing network communication, or they are waiting for an incoming connection to connect to them. 
The listening socket is called the server, and the socket that requests a connection with the listening socket is called a client.These names have nothing to do with hardware or computer roles. They simply define the role of each socket at each end of the connection.

The `netstat` command lets you discover which sockets are connected and which sockets are listening. Meaning, it tells you which ports are in use and which processes are using them. It can show you routing tables and statistics about your network interfaces and multicast connections.

1. `netstat -a` The -a (all) option makes netstat show all the connected and waiting sockets. 
**output**:

```
    Active Internet connections (servers and established)
    |Proto |Recv-Q |Send-Q |Local Address     |Foreign Address     |State |
    |tcp   |    0      0     localhost:domain      0.0.0.0:*        LISTEN 
    |tcp   |    0      0     0.0.0.0:ssh           0.0.0.0:*        LISTEN 
    |tcp   |    0      0     localhost:ipp         0.0.0.0:*        LISTEN 
    |tcp   |    0      0     localhost:smtp        0.0.0.0:*        LISTEN 
    |tcp6  |    0      0     [::]:ssh              [::]:*           LISTEN 
    |tcp6  |    0      0     ip6-localhost:ipp     [::]:*           LISTEN 
```
```
    Active UNIX domain sockets (servers and established)
    Proto RefCnt Flags   Type     State       I-Node  Path
    unix  24     [ ]     DGRAM                12831   /run/systemd/journal/dev-log
    unix  2      [ ACC ] STREAM    LISTENING  24747   @/tmp/dbus-zH6clYmvw8
    unix  2      [ ]     DGRAM                26372   /run/user/1000/systemd/notify
    unix  2      [ ]     DGRAM                23382   /run/user/121/systemd/notify
    unix  2      [ ACC ] SEQPACKET LISTENING  12839   /run/udev/control
```
The “Active Internet” section lists the connected external connections and local sockets listening for remote connection requests. That is, it lists the network connections that are (or will be) established to external devices.

The “Active Internet” columns are:  
**Proto**: The protocol used by this socket (for example, TCP or UDP).  
**Recv-Q**: The receive queue. These are incoming bytes that have been received and are buffered, waiting for the *local process* that is using this connection to read and consume them.  
**Send-Q**: The send queue. This shows the bytes that are ready to be sent from the send queue.  
**Local address**: The address details of the local end of the connection. The default is for netstat to show the *local hostname* for the address, and the name of the service for the port.  
**Foreign address**: The address and port number of the remote end of the connection.  
**State**: The state of the local socket. For UDP sockets, this is usually blank.(check out tcp notes in onenote)


The “UNIX domain” section lists the connected and listening internal connections. In other words, it lists the connections that have been established within your computer between different applications, processes, and elements of the operating system.

2. `netstat -au | less` -u option means show only udp, you can also use -t option to show tcp
3. `netstat -s` -s shows Network Statistics , use -t or other option to show result by Protocol
4. `netstat -p` -p shows process id with socket.
5. `netstat -tulpn` find out which process is listing upon a port


*example*: Find out which process is listing upon port 8080:
```
sudo netstat -nlp | grep :8080
```

### nmap
然后扫描本地端口
```
~ nmap localhost
Starting Nmap 7.80 ( https://nmap.org ) at 2020-09-08 01:08 CST
Nmap scan report for localhost (127.0.0.1)
Host is up (0.0018s latency).
Not shown: 998 closed ports
PORT     STATE SERVICE
8022/tcp open  oa-system
8080/tcp open  http-proxy
```

**List devices ip in LAN**

`nmap -sn 192.168.31.0/24`

### ip

https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/linux-ip-command-examples-usage-syntax

`ip` command can be used for following purposes:
1. Find out which interfaces are configured on the system.
2. Query the status of a IP interface.
3. Configure the local loop-back, Ethernet and other IP interfaces.
4. Assign, delete, set up IP address, routes, subnet and other IP information to IP interfaces.
5. List IP Addresses and property information.

### network interface

1. `ifconfig` allows for diagnosing and configuring network interfaces.
[detailed explanation](https://goinbigdata.com/demystifying-ifconfig-and-network-interfaces-in-linux/)
2. `tcpdump -D` can also show list of available interfaces
3. `ip a` aslo shows interfaces and their IP address

A new naming scheme(`wlp2s0`) has been introduced, rather than (`eth0`, `wlan0`) naming standards.
Basically, the first two letter describe the type of interface. `wl` for wlan, `en` for ethernet. The following code is often a description of the physical placement of the device in your computer - `p2` is likely PCI bus 2, and `s0` is likely slot 0.
* `wlp2s0` is your wifi interface. `en` is your Ethernet interface. `lo` is your loopback interface.

Linux kernel distinguishes between two types of network interfaces: *physical* and *virtual*. 
* *Physical network* interface represents an actual network hardware device such as network interface controller (NIC). 
* *Virtual network* interface doesn’t represent any hardware device and is usually linked to one. There are different kinds of virtual interfaces: Loopback, bridges, VLANs, tunnel interfaces and so on. 

### curl
to retrieve content with url  
`-o` option download content to file: `curl url -o filename`  
`-I, --head `  Show document info only  
`-v, --verbose` talkative

### wget
wget is a free utility for non-interactive download of files from the web. It supports HTTP, HTTPS, and FTP protocols, aser well as retrieval through HTTP proxies.
```
'wget http://website.com/files/file.zip' : download the file from web
'wget www.pincong.rocks' :download html into index.html file
'wget url -O <filename> : download the file and change its name
'wget -o download.log url' : log output to a file
'wget -r url' : download a html page and all its links' htmls. (use -l option to specify the recursion level)

```

## compression
压缩文件扩展名:

|extension| explanation             |
|----------|------------------------|
|*.Z   |compress 程序压缩的文件;      |
|*.zip |zip 程序压缩的文件;           |
|*.gz  |gzip 程序压缩的文件;          |
|*.bz2 |bzip2 程序压缩的文件;         |
|*.xz  |xz 程序压缩的文件;            |
|*.tar |tar 程序打包的数据,并没有压缩过;|
|*.tar.gz |tar程序打包的文件,其中并且经过 gzip 的压缩  |
|*.tar.bz2|tar 程序打包的文件,其中并且经过 bzip2 的压缩|
|*.tar.xz |tar 程序打包的文件,其中并且经过 xz 的压缩   |

### tar
* -c :创建打包文件,可搭配 -v 来察看过程中被打包的文件名(filename)
* -x :解打包或解压缩的功能,可以搭配 -C (大写) 在特定目录解开特别留意的是, -c, -t, -x 不可同时出现在一串命令行中。
* -z :通过 gzip 的支持进行压缩/解压缩:此时文件名最好为 *.tar.gz
* -j :通过 bzip2 的支持进行压缩/解压缩:此时文件名最好为 *.tar.bz2
* -J :通过 xz的支持进行压缩/解压缩:此时文件名最好为 *.tar.xz
    - 特别留意, -z, -j, -J 不可以同时出现在一串命令行中
* -v :在压缩/解压缩的过程中,将正在处理的文件名显示出来!
* -f filename:-f 后面要立刻接要被处理的文件名!建议 -f 单独写一个选项啰!(比较不会忘记)
* -C 目录:这个选项用在解压缩,若要在特定目录解压缩,可以使用这个选项。
* -p(小写) :保留备份数据的原本权限与属性,常用于备份(-c)重要的配置文件


* 压 缩: `tar -jcv -f filename.tar.bz2 <file1> <file2> ...`
* 查 询: `tar -jtv -f filename.tar.bz2`
* 解压缩: `tar -jxv -f filename.tar.bz2 -C <欲解压缩的目录>`

如果仅是打包而已,这个文件我们称呼为 tarfile 。 如果还有进行压缩的支持,我们就称呼为 tarball

### 7z
```
7z a -t7z -m0=lzma2 -mx=9 -mfb=64 -md=32m -ms=on -mhe=on -p'xiami' xiami.7z 虾米音乐下载器.7z 

```

## Others
### hibernate

> sudo systemctl suspend
> sudo systemctl hibernate

### xdg-open
open file in default app

`xdg-open file`

### test
test is used as part of the conditional execution of shell commands.
test exits with the status code determined by EXPRESSION. 
To see the exit status,type `echo $?`, A value of 0 means the expression evaluated as true, and a value of 1 means the expression evaluated as false.

two form:
1. test EXPRESSION
2. [ EXPRESSION ]

`test 100 -lt 99 && echo "Yes." || echo "No."`
or `[ 100 -lt 99 ] && echo "Yes." || echo "No."`

```
patrick@surface:$ [ 100 -eq 22 ]
patrick@surface:$ echo $?
1
```
[detailed usage](https://www.computerhope.com/unix/test.htm)


### printf

printf 由 POSIX 标准所定义，因此使用 printf 的脚本比使用 echo 移植性好。

printf 使用引用文本或空格分隔的参数，外面可以在 printf 中使用格式化字符串，还可以制定字符串的宽度、左右对齐方式等。
> 默认 printf 不会像 echo 自动添加换行符，我们可以手动添加 \n。

e.g.
```
printf "%-10s %-8s %-4s\n" 姓名 性别 体重kg  
printf "%-10s %-8s %-4.2f\n" 郭靖 男 66.1234 
printf "%-10s %-8s %-4.2f\n" 杨过 男 48.6543 
printf "%-10s %-8s %-4.2f\n" 郭芙 女 47.9876 
```

output:
```
姓名     性别   体重kg
郭靖     男      66.12
杨过     男      48.65
郭芙     女      47.99
```

[detailed tutorial](https://www.computerhope.com/unix/uprintf.htm)

### hexdump
`hexdump` has the ability to dump file contents into many formats like hexadecimal, octal, ASCII and decimal. This command takes a file, or any standard input, as input parameter and converts it to the format of your choice. 

`hexdump -b`  
This option is also called "__One-byte octal display__".  The output will be followed by sixteen space-separated, three column, zero-filled, bytes of input data, in octal, per line. 

`hexdump -c`  
This option is referred to as "__One-byte ASCII character display__".  will dispaly bits in ASCII character format.

`hexdump -C`  
Also known as "hex+ASCII display", will display bytes in both hex and ASCII character format:
```
patrick@surface:~$ hexdump -C -n 100 ./Downloads/16.png
00000000  89 50 4e 47 0d 0a 1a 0a  00 00 00 0d 49 48 44 52  |.PNG........IHDR|
00000010  00 00 05 dc 00 00 04 2d  08 06 00 00 00 40 8c 8d  |.......-.....@..|
...
```

`-n` length 
[other options](https://linoxide.com/linux-how-to/linux-hexdump-command-examples/)

you can use hexdump with other command:  
```
patrick@surface:~$ echo "this is cool" | hexdump -C -n 100
00000000  74 68 69 73 20 69 73 20  63 6f 6f 6c 0a           |this is cool.|
0000000d
```

to tail a binary file:
```
tail -f somefile | hexdump -C
```

### dpkg
install: `sudo dpkg -i path_to_deb_file`

uninstall: `dpkg -r program_name`

### xargs
`xargs` can be used when you need to take the output(STDOUT) from one command and use it as an argument to another.

**STDIN** and **arguments**:

Arguments are a list of strings provided to the command as it starts, usually by specifying them after the command name (e.g. echo these are some arguments or rm file1 file2). STDIN, on the other hand, is a stream of bytes (sometimes text, sometimes not) that the command can (optionally) read after it starts. Here are some examples (note that cat can take either arguments or STDIN, but it does different things with them):

```sh
echo file1 file2 | cat    # Prints "file1 file2", since that's the stream of
                          # bytes that echo passed to cat's STDIN
cat file1 file2    # Prints the CONTENTS of file1 and file2
echo file1 file2 | rm    # Prints an error message, since rm expects arguments
                         # and doesn't read from STDIN
```

`xargs` can be thought of as converting STDIN-style input to arguments:
```sh
echo file1 file2 | cat    # Prints "file1 file2"
echo file1 file2 | xargs cat    # Prints the CONTENTS of file1 and file2
```

echo actually does more-or-less the opposite: it converts its arguments to STDOUT (which can be piped to some other command's STDIN):
```sh
echo file1 file2 | echo    # Prints a blank line, since echo doesn't read from STDIN
echo file1 file2 | xargs echo    # Prints "file1 file2" -- the first echo turns
                                 # them from arguments into STDOUT, xargs turns
                                 # them back into arguments, and the second echo
                                 # turns them back into STDOUT
echo file1 file2 | xargs echo | xargs echo | xargs echo | xargs echo    # Similar,
                                 # except that it converts back and forth between
                                 # args and STDOUT several times before finally
                                 # printing "file1 file2" to STDOUT.
```

### crontab
http://cn.linux.vbird.org/linux_basic/0430cron_3.php

循环运行的例行性工作排程是由 cron (crond) 这个系统服务来控制的，Linux 系统上面原本就有非常多的例行性工作，因此这个系统服务是默认启动的。

另外， 由於使用者自己也可以进行例行性工作排程，所以 Linux 也提供使用者控制例行性工作排程的命令 (*crontab*)

**1.** 为了安全性的问题， 与 at 同样的，我们可以限制使用 crontab 的使用者帐号

**2.** 语法

`[root@www ~]# crontab [-u username] [-l|-e|-r]`
* `-u` : 只有 root 才能进行这个任务，亦即帮其他使用者创建/移除 crontab 工作排程；
* `-e`  : 编辑 crontab 的工作内容
* `-l ` : 查阅 crontab 的工作内容
* `-r`  : 移除所有的 crontab 的工作内容，若仅要移除一项，请用 -e 去编辑

```sh
m   h  dom   mon   dow   command 

* * * * * /home/patrick/note-backup
```
| 分钟 | 小时  | 日期 | 月份 | 周  | 命令       |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ----| ---- | ---------- |
| 0-59 | 0-23 | 1-31 | 1-12 | 0-7 | 要执行的命令|

```


| 特殊字符 | 代表意义                                                   |
| ---- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| *    | 举例0 12 * * * 就代表著『不论何月、何日的礼拜几的 12:00 都运行后续命令』的意思！ |
|   ,   |  下达的工作是 3:00 与 6:00 时，就会是：
0 3,6 * * * command
时间参数还是有五栏，不过第二栏是 3,6 ，代表 3 与 6 都适用！                                                      |
|      |                                                        |

```