
https://itsfoss.com/apt-command-guide/

### apt update
apt actually works on a database of available packages. If the database is not updated, the system won’t know if there are any newer packages available. This is why updating the repository should be the first thing to do in in any Linux system after a fresh install.

Updating the package database requires superuser privileges so you’ll need to use sudo: `sudo apt update`

### apt upgrade
```
sudo apt upgrade
```
This will show you how many and which all packages are going to be upgraded, and ask for confirmation before upgrade.

```
sudo apt full-upgrade
```
full-upgrade works the same as upgrade except that if system upgrade needs the removal of a package already installed on the system, it will do that.

### apt purge
```
sudo apt purge <package_name>
```

difference between apt remove and apt purge
* `apt remove` just removes the binaries of a package. It leaves residue configuration files.
* `apt purge` removes everything related to a package including the configuration files.

If you used apt remove to a get rid of a particular software and then install it again, your software will have the same configuration files. Of course, you will be asked to override the existing configuration files when you install it again.

### apt list --upgradeable
Using this command, you can see all the packages that have a newer version ready to be upgraded

### apt autoremove
This command removes libs and packages that were installed automatically to satisfy the dependencies of an installed package. If the package is removed, these automatically installed packages, though useless, remains in the system.

### apt commmand option
https://linux.die.net/man/8/apt-get

```
-f, --fix-broken
-y, --yes, --assume-yes
```
