*1.* `SIGINT` is the interrupt signal. The terminal sends it to the foreground process when the user presses `ctrl-c`. The default behavior is to terminate the process, but it can be caught or ignored. The intention is to provide a mechanism for an orderly, graceful shutdown.

We can send this signal to currently running process by using following command:-
```
kill -2 PID 

kill -SIGINT PID
```

*2.* `SIGQUIT` is the dump core signal. The terminal sends it to the foreground process when the user presses `ctrl-\`. The default behavior is to terminate the process and dump core, but it can be caught or ignored. The intention is to provide a mechanism for the user to abort the process. You can look at SIGINT as "user-initiated happy termination" and `SIGQUIT` as "user-initiated unhappy termination."


*3.* `SIGTERM` is the termination signal. The default behavior is to terminate the process, but it also can be caught or ignored. The intention is to kill the process, gracefully or not, but to first allow it a chance to cleanup.

This is the default signal sent by the `kill` and `killall` command.
```
kill -15 PID 

kill -SIGTERM PID 
```

*4.* `SIGKILL` is the kill signal. The only behavior is to kill the process, immediately. As the process cannot catch the signal, it cannot cleanup, and thus this is a signal of last resort.

```
kill -9 PID 

kill -SIGKILL PID 
```


*5.* `SIGSTOP` is the pause signal. The only behavior is to pause the process; the signal cannot be caught or ignored. The shell uses pausing (and its counterpart, resuming via `SIGCONT`) to implement job control.

The main difference between `SIGKILL` & `SIGSTOP` is :-
- SIGKILL immediately terminates the running process where as SIGSTOP stops the running process. In case of termination memory segment in user space and PCB in kernel space get offloaded. Whereas, in case of stop memory segment in user space and PCB in kernel space is there but CPU stop executing the instruction.

```
kill -17/19/23 PID 

kill -SIGSTOP PID 
```

