## File, Directory operations
### cd 
```
cd / 

cd .. 

cd cd ~ 

cd /dir/dir2 / means from root directory 

cd dir means from current directory 

cd -  used to return to the previous dir 
```

### popd/pushd/dirs
[detials](https://linux.101hacks.com/cd-command/dirs-pushd-popd/)

dirs: Display the directory stack

pushd: Push directory into the stack

popd: Pop directory from the stack and cd to it

use above commands you can save several dirs and go to them in the order of the stacks(first in first out)

### pwd 
Show current path 

### tree 
show all directories and file in tree pattern 

###  ls 

`ls -a `

`ls -l `show files and detailed info(with -h can show you human readable info, size will be mb, kb)
 > `ll`: show files and detailed info including hidden files 
    [detailed tutorial](https://www.garron.me/en/go2linux/ls-file-permissions.html)

```
drwxr-xr-x  2 patrick patrick     4096 Mar 26 12:54 bin
-rw-r--r--  1 patrick patrick       99 Nov 15 17:12 bluetooth.txt
```
The permissions info is represented by first ten characters, first character identifies the type, `d` means directory and `-` means file the next nine characters represent permissions for each set.
1. first three for user who owns the file
2. middle three for group
3. last three for others

* `rwx` means having all read write execute permissions, `r-x` means no write permissions.
* `2` means number of dir or links
* `patrick` and `patrick` mean user and group
* `4096` means size by bits

`ls -R ` recursively, show all dir and files inside it.

计算当前目录下的文件数和目录数 
`ls -l * |grep "^-"|wc -l` 文件个数 
`ls -l * |grep "^d"|wc -l` 目录个数 

`ls -l` for mtime, `ls -lu` for atime, `ls -lc` for ctime
1. mtime, or modification time, is when the file was last modified. 
2. ctime, or change time, is when the file’s property changes. 
3. atime, or access time, is updated when the file’s contents are read by an application or a command
> *Atime can be updated alone, Ctime will update atime, Mtime will update both atime and ctime.*

sort the results by time:  
`ls/ll --sort=time`

### mkdir 
递归创建多个目录 
```
mkdir -p test2/test22 
```

### file
show the type of a file or directory, including binary, ASCII text, directory and data.

### touch

`touch filename` used to create empty file
`touch -a filename` use to update access time without changing the file

### mv
`mv -t DESTINATION file1 file2 file3`

### rm

```
rm -i 代替 rm ，删除前确认 

rm -r删除目录及其下面的所有档案 

rm -v：显示指令的详细执行过程 

rm -d 只删除空目录 ，代替 rmdir 不能删除非空目录 
```

### cp
`cp foo.txt bar.txt` : copy foo.txt to new created bar.txt in the same directory.

 > this will overwrite if there's already a file named bar.txt in current dir
 -b option will make a backup.
 or Using the -i flag the command will prompt to overwrite the file. 

`cp foo.txt dir` : copy file to directory named dir in current folder.

`cp foo bar.txt baz.txt dir`: copy multiple file to a dir

To copy a directory pass the -R flag. This will recursively copy a folder and create a copy.
`cp -R directory/ foo`

目标文件存在时，会询问是否覆盖 `cp -i` 

一个目录及其档案复制到另一个目录下 `cp -a `

How to preserve file attributes: 
pass the `--preserve` option along with the attributes to be preserved. 

### ln
create hard link or symbolic link
hardlink: `ln text.txt test.txt`
symboliclink: `ln -s text.txt test.txt`

**show symbolic link in**:  
To only process the current directory:
`find . -maxdepth 1 -type l -ls`

## File Search, Replace...
### find

`find . -name <filename>` :this will show all file and directories named <filename> in current directory(.), if path is ignored, current dir is default.
`find . -iname <name>` : means case insensitive
`find . type f -name <name>`: means only show content whose type is file
`find . -name '*abcd*'`: wild card

**option about time**:  
`find path -mtime +7` means file that hasn't been modifed in last 7 days.
1. +4代表大于等于5天前的文件名
2. -4代表小于等于4天内的文件文件名
3. 4则是代表4-5那一天的文件文件名

**option about user**:  
1. `-uid n` :n 为数字,这个数字是使用者的帐号 ID,亦即 UID ,这个 UID 是记录在/etc/passwd 里面与帐号名称对应的数字。
2. `-gid n `:n 为数字,这个数字是群组名称的 ID,亦即 GID,这个 GID 记录在/etc/group
3. `-user name` :name 为使用者帐号名称
4. `-group name`:name 为群组名称喔
5. `-nouser`:寻找文件的拥有者不存在 /etc/passwd 的人!
6. `-nogroup`:寻找文件的拥有群组不存在于 /etc/group 的文件!

**option about file**:  
`-name filename`:搜寻文件名称为 filename 的文件;
`-size [+-]SIZE`:搜寻比 SIZE 还要大(+)或小(-)的文件。这个 SIZE 的规格有:
> c: 代表 Byte, k: 代表 1024Bytes。所以,要找比 50KB还要大的文件,就是“ -size +50k ”
`-type TYPE`:搜寻文件的类型为 TYPE 的,类型主要有:一般正规文件 (f), 设备文件 (b, c), 目录 (d), 链接文件 (l), socket (s), 及 FIFO (p) 等属性。
`-perm mode` :搜寻文件权限“刚好等于” mode 的文件,这个 mode 为类似 chmod的属性值,举例来说, -rwsr-xr-x 的属性为 4755 !
`-perm -mode` :搜寻文件权限“必须要全部囊括 mode 的权限”的文件,举例来说,我们要搜寻 -rwxr--r-- ,亦即 0744 的文件,使用 -perm -0744,
当一个文件的权限为 -rwsr-xr-x ,亦即 4755 时,也会被列出来, 因为 -rwsr-xr-x 的属性已经囊括了 -rwxr--r-- 的属性了。
`-perm /mode` :搜寻文件权限“包含任一 mode 的权限”的文件,举例来说,我们搜寻 -rwxr-xr-x ,亦即 -perm /755 时,但一个文件属性-rw------- 也会被列出来,因为他有 -rw.... 的属性存在!

### locate
find files by name, this command will find files in database in /var/lib/mlocate/, instead of scaning the disk, so it is faster than `find` command, but the database needs to be updated by hand.(auto per day)

update database: `sudo updatedb`

### grep

1. `grep 'import' new.py` :Search any line that contains the word in filename (with -i option search case-insensitive)
2. `grep -r 'import' <path>`: recursively, search all files in current dir for word 'import'(with path option search for given dir)
3. `grep -c 'nixcraft' frontpage.md `: Search and display the total number of times that the string ‘nixcraft’ appears in a file named frontpage.md
4. `grep -w "boo" file` :with `-w` option search exact word 'boo' only, will not match 'boo1', '2boo' ...

-  `-n` Display the matched lines and their line numbers.
-  `-l` Displays list of a filenames only.
-  `-a, --text` equivalent to `--binary-files=text`
-  `-I` equivalent to `--binary-files=without-match`, It ignores binary files.
-  `--exclude`, exclude some files `grep "HTTP_PROXY" -rI --exclude=*.{md,js}  ~/*`
-  `--exclude-dir`, exclude directory, `--exclude-dir={node_modules,dir1,dir2,dir3}`


### sed
replace string in files

* `sed -i -- 's/Flasky/TakaBlog/g' *.html` replace `Flasky` with `TakaBlog` in all `.html` files within current directory.
    + `sed -i -- 's/Flasky/TakaBlog/g' ./auth/*.html` replace within `auth` dicrectory

https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/112024/421531

### awk
main use: Splits each input line into fields(*delimited by whitespace character by default* ) and display them respectively.

1. `$ awk '{print}' employee.txt` work like **cat**
2. `$ awk '/manager/ {print}' employee.txt ` work like **grep 'word' file.txt**, display line that contains given word.
3. `$ awk '{print $1,$4}' employee.txt ` print first 1st and 4th field if possible, **$0** means all fileds.
4. `$ awk '{print NR,$0}' employee.txt ` print lines with line number
5. `$ awk 'NR==3, NR==6 {print NR,$0}' employee.txt ` print Lines From 3 to 6


## Files Read, Write...

### more

`more 按页显示文件内容，空格翻页 b回到第一页`

### less

like cat, less could also show content of a file: less new.py

### tail

### cat 

```
cat 文件 查看文件内容 

cat > 文件 创建新文件 

cat file1 file2 合并显示文件1, 2

tac 反向显示文件 

cat .bashrc | less : show file content using scroll 
```

### diff
`diff common.txt dev.txt`
output: < means line exists in common.txt but not in dev.txt, > means the other way around.
```
< Werkzeug==0.12.2
< WTForms==2.1
```

**diff two command output**:  
```
diff <(cat requirements/common.txt) <(pip freeze)
```

**color diff**:
1. `diff old new | colordiff`
2. `diff --color -u old new`

## File Execution
### source
source is used to read and execute content of a file(usually a set of commands), such as .py or shell script.
source can be replacec by dot : `. script.sh`

## File Permission
### chmod/chown/chgrp

```
chmod [ugao] [+-=] [rwx] [file or dir]
    1. u:user g:group a:all o:other, if none of these are used, the 'a' is default.
    2. +:add permissions -:remove them =:set a permission and remove others
    3. read write execute 

e.g. chmod u=rw, og+r, new_file.txt
     chmod -R u+x directory  -R means changing permissions recersively for a dirctory.
     
the other way is to use number to change permissions
各权限的分数对照表如下:
> r:4 > w:2 > x:1

e.g.### 
[-rwxrwx] 分数则是:
> owner = rwx = 4+2+1 = 7 
> group = ### rwx = 4+2+1 = 7 
> others=  = 0+0+0 = 0
所以等一下我们设置权限的变更时,该文件的权限数字就是770啦!
```
chgrp :改变文件所属群组
chown :改变文件拥有者 `sudo chown patrick: myfolder`



## Process Management
###  ps 

> **all process can be found in /proc directory**

detailed tutorial: [ps - Linux manual page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/ps.1.html)

* `ps` :without parameter will only show process executed by root
* `ps –A/e `:all process including those started by bootloader(systemd)
* `ps -A | grep <processname> `
* `ps -eu` show fields like %CPU   %MEM    VSZ    RSS
* `ps l` show basic info like s、pid、ppid、time 和 ucmd 等字段信息。

> Usually when we use the command ps we add parameters like -a, -x and -u.
While -a lists processes started by all users, -x also lists processes started at boot like daemons, the parameter -u will add columns with additional information on each process:
* `ps aux` equals to `ps -eu`

* `ps -o tid,sid,pid...(list of fields)` customize output fields

	- *sid*(session),*tid*(terminal),*pid*(process)
	- *ppid*(parent),*tpgid*(Linux 上的所有守护进程的 tpgid 值都是 - 1)
	- *cmd*(location of cmd), *ucmd*(short one),*nice/ni*(priority, [-20,19], large means low priority)
	-  *s*(state)
	
| field | explanation                                                    |
| ----- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| vsz   | virtual memory size KB vsz值并不反映真正物理内存大小                        |
| rss   | resident set size 表示进程真正占用了的物理内存大小，单位 KB                       |
| pmem  | 占用的物理内存大小 (rss) 占本机总物理内存大小百分比                                  |
| PRI   | priority of the process.  Higher number means lower priority.  |
| nlwp  | 表示当前process线程组中的线程个数，单线程进程此值均为 1                               |


* `ps k/--sort [+/-]field` sort the output by specified field, + ascending, - descending

* filter:
	* `ps p 2,3,6` select ones whose pid equals to 2,3,6
	* `ps -s <sid>` 
	* `ps U <uid or user>`
	* `ps -t <tty1>`  , (`ps T` to show current terminal)

### Kill 

`-SIGTERM (-15) `is default 
`signal 9, called SIGKIL` is stronger

1. `kill pid`
2. `kill -9 pid` : force kill

1. `killall prcname `
2. `killall -9 appname`

> to find out the pid of a process:
```
pidof firefox
pgrep firefox
```

### pkill, pgrep
```
pgrep [options] pattern
pkill [options] pattern
       
pgrep  looks through the currently running processes and lists the process IDs which match
the selection criteria to stdout.  All the criteria have to match.  For example,

pkill will send the specified signal (by default SIGTERM) to each process instead of listing them on stdout.
```

### jobs
show all backgroud process with id
> fg %(id) :bring process back to foregroud
> bg


## Enviroment variable
### alias
```
alias dtwt='syndaemon -d -i 1.0s'
```
to remove alias:
` unalias foo`

### export

In general, the export command marks an environment variable to be exported with any newly forked child processes and thus it allows a child process to inherit all marked variables. 
detailed instructions [export - LinuxConfig.org](https://linuxconfig.org/learning-linux-commands-export)
> use **export** to set temporary environment variablVe:
`export MYVAR=10`
`export PATH=$PATH:/home/patrick/clash` or `export PATH=$PATH:$(pwd)`(set env for current dir)
and then you can run executable by command in specified directory.

### env, printenv, set, export

[link](note://environment_variables)

* env

allow you to run another program in a another environment without influencing the current one.
run without parameter, will print all environment variables.

* `printenv`
* `printenv HOME`
* `printenv LANG PWD`: print env variables

**set**  
set  *shell* variables
use without option, `set `show a list of env, shell and variables without parameter
> to create shell variables: `var='sgjgdks'`

**unset**  
delete shell and env variables

**export**  
In general, the export command marks an environment variable to be exported with any newly forked child processes and thus it allows a child process to inherit all marked variables. 
detailed instructions [export - LinuxConfig.org](https://linuxconfig.org/learning-linux-commands-export)

use *export* to set temporary environment variable:
`export MYVAR=10`
`export PATH=$PATH:/home/patrick/clash` or `export PATH=$PATH:$(pwd)`(set env for current dir)
and then you can run executable by command in specified directory.

**Persistent Environment Variables**
```
To make Environment variables persistent you need to define those variables in the bash configuration files. In most Linux distributions when you start a new session, environment variables are read from the following files:

1. /etc/environment - Use this file to set up system-wide environment variables. Variables in this file are set in the following format:
FOO=bar
VAR_TEST="Test Var"

2. /etc/profile - Variables set in this file are loaded whenever a bash login shell is entered. When declaring environment variables in this file you need to use the export command:
export JAVA_HOME="/path/to/java/home"
export PATH=$PATH:$JAVA_HOME/bin

3. Per-user shell specific configuration files. For example, if you are using Bash, you can declare the variables in the ~/.bashrc:
export PATH="$HOME/bin:$PATH"

To load the new environment variables into the current shell session use the source command:
source ~/.bashrc
```

## Cmds Help, Usage, History
### history

```
history | less : show command histories
and you could use '!id' to run the history command
```

### type
The type command is used to find out if command is builtin or external binary file. It also indicate how it would be interpreted if used as a command name.

`type -t command`
outputs will be:
> alias (command is shell alias)
> keyword (command is shell reserved word)
> function (command is shell function)
> builtin (command is shell builtin)
> file (command is disk file)

`type -a command`
The -a option can be used to find out if given command is disk file, alias, keyword or function. It will display all of the places that contains an executable available including aliases, builtins, and functions.

`type -a pwd`
Sample Outputs:
```
pwd is a shell builtin
pwd is /bin/pwd
```

### man

```
man to show instructions of a command: man ps
```

### whereis/which/whatis

The whereis command lets users locate binary, source, and manual page files for a command. 
`whereis ls`
also, whereis can help you to know whether a command is shell builtin.(if whereis can't locate the path, it is a builtin)

`which` searches your user-specific PATH (which may include some of the locations whereis searches, and may not include others - it might also include some places that whereis doesn't search if you'd added to your PATH)

`whatis` display one-line manual page descriptions


## Disk Usage, Operation

### df

```
df -h show disk space condition
df -Th: to see filesystem of  and the type of them
```

### du
`du -h` show the size of current directory with readable result.
`du -a -h` show all files along with their size in current directory.


### dd
dd 可备份完整的 partition 或 disk ,因为 dd 可读取磁盘的 sector 表面数据

### lsblk 
列出系统上的所有磁盘列表, 就是列出所有储存设备
```
NAME        MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
loop0         7:0    0 146.5M  1 loop /snap/code/46
loop1         7:1    0    55M  1 loop /snap/core18/1880
sdb           8:16   1  28.8G  0 disk 
└─sdb1        8:17   1  28.8G  0 part 
nvme0n1     259:0    0 238.5G  0 disk 
├─nvme0n1p1 259:1    0   300M  0 part /boot/efi
├─nvme0n1p2 259:2    0   128M  0 part 
├─nvme0n1p3 259:3    0 159.3G  0 part /media/patrick/system
├─nvme0n1p4 259:4    0  42.8G  0 part /home
├─nvme0n1p5 259:5    0   603M  0 part 
├─nvme0n1p6 259:6    0  24.2G  0 part /
├─nvme0n1p7 259:7    0   334M  0 part /boot
└─nvme0n1p8 259:8    0  10.9G  0 part [SWAP]
```
1. `RM`:是否为可卸载设备 (removable device),如光盘、USB 磁盘等等
2. `SIZE`:当然就是容量啰!
3. `RO`:是否为只读设备的意思
4. `TYPE`:是磁盘 (disk)、分区 (partition) 还是只读存储器 (rom) 等输出
5. `MOUTPOINT`:就是前一章谈到的挂载点!

The disk is `/dev/sdb` and the partitions, when created, on the disk will be `/dev/sdb1`. The same is `nvme0n1`, it's a disk and the paritions created on it are `nvme0n1p1`, `nvme0n1p2`, `nvme0n1p3`

The  command  `lsblk  --fs` provides overview of filesystems, *LABELs* and *UUIDs* on available block devices:
```
patrick@surface:/dev$ lsblk  --fs

NAME        FSTYPE   LABEL       UUID                                 FSAVAIL FSUSE% MOUNTPOINT
loop0       squashfs                                                        0   100% /snap/code/46
loop1       squashfs                                                        0   100% /snap/core18/1880
sdb                                                                                  
└─sdb1      vfat     UBUNTU 20_0 A0B3-E255                                           
nvme0n1                                                                              
├─nvme0n1p1 vfat                 A5EB-573A                             262.7M    12% /boot/efi
├─nvme0n1p2                                                                          
├─nvme0n1p3 ntfs     系统        DA18EBFA09C1B27D                       15.9G    90% /media/patrick/系统
├─nvme0n1p4 ext4                 121fdf54-ccd5-427c-8bae-145e516f2508     12G    66% /home
├─nvme0n1p5 ntfs                 4C90982D9098200E                                    
├─nvme0n1p6 ext4                 57461f26-f288-4d6a-983d-1ac905b2f4d7    9.7G    54% /
├─nvme0n1p7 ext4                 c9fa48cc-6df4-4574-89d1-0955ae947f94  148.9M    44% /boot
└─nvme0n1p8 swap                 0e507443-9988-4428-8431-1c2ac918ccd4                [SWAP]
```

### blkid
`blkid` 找出设备的 UUID. UUID 是全域单一识别码(universally unique identifier),Linux 会将系统内所有的设备都给予一个独一无二的识别码, 这个识别码就可以拿来作为挂载或者是使用这个设备/文件系统
```
patrick@surface:~/python/2048$ blkid
/dev/nvme0n1p8: UUID="0e507443-9988-4428-8431-1c2ac918ccd4" TYPE="swap" PARTUUID="668cacad-773e-410d-a831-48c1ae1e3cab"
/dev/nvme0n1p6: UUID="57461f26-f288-4d6a-983d-1ac905b2f4d7" TYPE="ext4" PARTUUID="2c49b1a7-5d6e-4b01-b93d-213158d7eb4f"
```

### fdisk
`fdisk` stands (for “fixed disk or format disk“), With the help of `fdisk` command you can view, create, resize, delete, change, copy and move partitions on a hard drive using its own user friendly text based menu driven interface.

**1.** `-l` argument stand for (listing all partitions) is used with fdisk command to view all available partitions on Linux.
```
patrick@surface:/$ sudo fdisk -l

Disk /dev/nvme0n1: 238.49 GiB, 256060514304 bytes, 500118192 sectors
Disk model: SAMSUNG MZFLW256HEHP-000MV              
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: 6B18BA9F-7757-4D87-80D1-C24103E96CCB

Device             Start       End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/nvme0n1p1      2048    616447    614400   300M EFI System
/dev/nvme0n1p2    616448    878591    262144   128M Microsoft reserved
/dev/nvme0n1p3    878592 334925051 334046460 159.3G Microsoft basic data
/dev/nvme0n1p4 334925824 424546303  89620480  42.8G Linux filesystem
/dev/nvme0n1p5 498765824 500000767   1234944   603M Windows recovery environment
/dev/nvme0n1p6 424546304 475328511  50782208  24.2G Linux filesystem
/dev/nvme0n1p7 475328512 476012543    684032   334M Linux filesystem
/dev/nvme0n1p8 476012544 498765823  22753280  10.9G Linux swap

Partition table entries are not in disk order.

Disk /dev/sdb: 28.84 GiB, 30943995904 bytes, 60437492 sectors        // This is USB drive
Disk model: DataTraveler 3.0
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: dos
Disk identifier: 0x0002f226
```

To view all partitions of specific hard disk use the option `-l` with device name.:
```
patrick@surface:/$ sudo fdisk -l /dev/sdb

Disk /dev/sdb: 28.84 GiB, 30943995904 bytes, 60437492 sectors
Disk model: DataTraveler 3.0
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: dos
Disk identifier: 0x0002f226

Device     Boot Start      End  Sectors  Size Id Type
/dev/sdb1  *     2048 60437491 60435444 28.8G  c W95 FAT32 (LBA)
```


### mount
All files accessible in a Unix system are arranged in one big tree, the file hierarchy, rooted at /.  These files can be spread out over several devices.  The `mount` command serves to attach the filesystem  found on some device to the big file tree.  Conversely, the umount(8) command will detach it again. 

**命令格式**：
```
mount [-t fstype] [-o options] device dir
```
**1.** `mount` 单纯的输入 `mount` 会显示目前挂载的信息。加上 `-l` 可增列 Label 名称

**2.** `-t fstype` 指定文件系统的类型, 通常不必指定，mount 会自动选择正确的类型。
常见的 Linux 支持类型有:xfs, ext3, ext4, iso9660(光盘格式),  UNIX(LINUX) 文件网络共享: nfs, Windows NT ntfs文件系统: ntfs 

**3.** `-o options` 主要用来描述设备或档案的挂接方式  
The `options` argument is a comma-separated list:  `sudo mount -o remount,rw /disk/location /mount/location`
- *loop*：用来把一个文件当成硬盘分区挂接上系统  
- *ro*：采用只读方式挂接设备  ,*rw*：采用读写方式挂接设备  
- *iocharset*：指定访问文件系统所用字符集
- *async, sync*:此文件系统是否使用同步写入 (sync) 或非同步 (async) 的内存机制
- *atime,noatime*: 是否修订文件的读取时间(atime)。为了性能,某些时刻可使用 noatime
- *auto, noauto*: 允许此 filesystem 被以 mount -a 自动挂载(auto) 
- *dev, nodev*:是否允许此 filesystem 上,可创建设备文件? dev 为可允许
- *suid, nosuid*: 是否允许此 filesystem 含有 suid/sgid 的文件格式?
- *exec, noexec*: 是否允许此 filesystem 上拥有可执行 binary 文件?
- *user, nouser*: 一般来说, mount 仅有 root 可以进行,但下达 user 参数,则可让一般 user 也能够对此 partition 进行 mount 。
- *defaults*: 默认值为:` rw, suid, dev, exec, auto, nouser, and async`
- *remount*: 重新挂载,这在系统出错,或重新更新参数时,很有用!

**4.** `device` 要挂接(mount)的设备
UUID 识别码就可以拿来作为device挂载: 
```
[root@study ~]# blkid /dev/vda4
/dev/vda4: UUID="e0a6af55-26e7-4cb7-a515-826a8bd29e90" TYPE="xfs"
[root@study ~]# mount UUID="e0a6af55-26e7-4cb7-a515-826a8bd29e90" /data/x
```

**5.** `dir` 设备在系统上的挂接点(mount point)。

**mount a usb drive**  
如果你使用的是图形界面, 那么系统会自动的帮你挂载到 `/media/` 里面去, 文字界面没有这个福利

应先用`fdisk –l`  查看系统的硬盘和硬盘分区情况:
```
...

Disk /dev/sdb: 28.84 GiB, 30943995904 bytes, 60437492 sectors
Disk model: DataTraveler 3.0
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: dos
Disk identifier: 0x0002f226

Device     Boot Start      End  Sectors  Size Id Type
/dev/sdb1  *     2048 60437491 60435444 28.8G  c W95 FAT32 (LBA)
```
系统多了一个SCSI硬盘`/dev/sdd`和一个磁盘分区`/dev/sdd1`,`/dev/sdd1`就是我们要挂接的U盘。



## User Info, Managment
### w/who

w is a command-line utility that displays information about currently logged in users and what each user is doing. It also gives information about how long the system has been running, the current time, and the system load average.
detailed info about output explanation and avaiable options: [link](https://linuxize.com/post/w-command-in-linux/)

### whoami
查看当前用户名，比如`patrick`

### uname
`uanme` to check out the kernel and system information

### su

switch to root usr. use `exit` to exit root user.

### sudo
sudo only works with executables.

**e.g.**
if you `sudo cd direc`, your computer will look through your PATH, trying to find an executable named "cd". It will not find one. (only the shell built-in command "cd" exists, and that is not an executable file). Hence, you get an error. (On Ubuntu, the error message `sudo: cd: command not found`.)

